The theme for this program is
“Be Childlike—But Not Childish!”
First Corinthians 14:20
is our theme scripture:
“Brothers, do not become
young children in your understanding,
“but be young children as to badness;
and become full-grown in your understanding.”
In this single verse,
we’re told not to be
like a young child in one way
and we’re told to be
like a young child in another way.
We should not be like a child
when it comes to understanding,
and we should be like a child
when it comes to badness.
During this discussion,
let’s focus on three ways
we should not be like a child
and then let’s talk about three ways
we should be like a child.
Please turn to Hebrews 5:13, 14,
and let’s identify negative trait number one
that we do not want to imitate:
“For everyone who continues to feed on milk
“is unacquainted
with the word of righteousness,
“for he is a young child.
“But solid food belongs to mature people,
“to those who through use
have their powers of discernment trained
to distinguish both right and wrong.”
So the negative trait that children have
is immature feeding habits.
Think about it: Young children
have a tendency to eat what they like
regardless of its nutritional value.
Most young ones would be perfectly happy
eating ice cream, candy, cookies,
and other sweets for all of their meals.
But now we ask,
What do our spiritual appetites
and feeding habits reveal about us?
Consider: How do we spend our free time?
Do we squander
voluminous hours watching television
or reading material that provides
little or no spiritual nutrition?
Or do we make wise use of our free time
to take in solid spiritual food?
When we receive
a new issue of The Watchtower,
do we merely scan through it,
looking at a few highlights,
and then do something else?
Do we take time
to research deeper spiritual truths
so as to fully understand them?
Do we take time to really meditate?
Meditation is not daydreaming.
Meditation is bridled, focused thought.
Pause your reading to ask questions such as:
‘What does this teach me about Jehovah?
‘With whom could I share this information?
‘What’s Jehovah telling me?
‘How does this fit in with other things
I know about this subject?
How can I make application?’
James 1:25 encourages us
to peer into God’s Word.
According to the Reference Bible,
‘peer’ literally means to ‘stoop beside.’
To illustrate:
Simply reading through the Bible
could be likened to walking quickly
through the world’s greatest museum
and periodically glancing
at the various displays.
You will learn something.
But meditatively peering into God’s Word
can be likened to stopping
all along the museum route
and even stooping down
and closely examining from different angles
the artifacts, exhibitions, and displays.
Now our knowledge and appreciation
are going to be enhanced much more.
Yes, our spiritual appetite
and feeding habits
reveal much about whether
we have done away
with the trait of a young child, namely,
immature feeding habits.
Now please turn to Ephesians 4:14.
Let’s discern from this scripture
negative trait number two
that we don’t want to imitate:
“So we should no longer be children,
“tossed about as by waves
and carried here and there
“by every wind of teaching
by means of the trickery of men,
by means of cunning in deceptive schemes.”
So, what’s the negative trait?
Young children are easily tricked, or fooled.
This scripture likens being easily tricked
about what’s right or wrong
to being tossed about
by the waves of the ocean
and blown around by the wind.
If you think of a piece of wood
floating in a turbulent ocean
or a piece of paper in a windstorm,
there’s no stability or direction.
Both can be easily maneuvered
to go anywhere—take any position.
Well, that’s true of very young children
who often can be easily deceived.
For example, if given a choice
between a shiny coin of little value
and paper money of great value,
the shiny coin will likely be chosen.
But now, here’s the point:
What do our spiritual choices
reveal about us?
Do our choices in regard to music
and other entertainment,
clothing, and grooming indicate
that we’re being fooled
even slightly by Satan and his world?
Yes, Satan is bent on tricking us,
but Jehovah tells us
at 1 Corinthians 14:20
(the scripture we read earlier):
“Do not become young children
in your understanding.”
But now, please turn to Matthew 11:16, 17.
Here we’ll find
the third negative trait of a child
that we do not want to imitate:
“With whom will I compare this generation?
“It is like young children
sitting in the marketplaces
“who call out to their playmates, saying:
“‘We played the flute for you,
but you did not dance;
we wailed, but you
did not beat yourselves in grief.’”
Jesus was saying that adult people
were acting like children.
Children love to play.
So the negative trait of young children
is that they prefer play over responsibility.
Think about it: The vast majority
of the waking hours of a small child
are spent playing
—play, play, and more play.
Most of their life is fun and games.
But later, when the child goes to school,
where does he get the time to do so?
He has to take it from his playtime.
But now, spiritually speaking,
we can ask ourselves,
‘How far have we progressed
in buying out time from our playtime?’
Ephesians 5:16 encourages us
to ‘make the best use of our time.’
Literally, according to the footnote,
this scripture is telling us
to ‘buy out the appointed time’
—that is, buy it from less important things.
So the question for all of us is,
Have we bought out
the majority of our playtime
for more important
spiritual responsibilities?
Now, we’ve discussed three negative traits
of a young child that we want to avoid.
If we had time, we could have discussed
other negative traits to be avoided,
such as how children tend
to have a short attention span
(they’re easily distracted),
their curiosity often gets them into trouble,
and they generally
need a lot of time and attention
(they’re high-maintenance).
But now let’s briefly discuss
three positive traits
of a young child that we do well to imitate.
Positive characteristic number one
is at 1 Corinthians 14:20,
which we read at the outset.
That scripture tells us
to “be young children as to badness.”
So, what’s the characteristic
that we want to imitate?
Young children are innocent,
inexperienced, when it comes to badness.
Or put another way,
they haven’t done many truly bad things.
Like children, we don’t want
to gain knowledge
or experience in what is bad.
For example, when it comes to pornography,
we want no experience whatsoever
in regard to this filthy thing
of Satan’s world.
When it comes to television programs
that are designated for a “mature audience,”
remember to tell yourself,
‘I’m not old enough; I’m a young child.’
For positive characteristic number two,
let’s consider Matthew 18:2-4:
“So calling a young child to him,
“he [Jesus] stood him
in their midst and said:
“‘Truly I say to you, unless you turn around
“‘and become as young children,
“‘you will by no means enter
into the Kingdom of the heavens.
“‘Therefore, whoever
will humble himself like this young child
is the one who is the greatest
in the Kingdom of the heavens.’”
What’s the desirable trait?
Young children are humble and teachable.
Young children ask many questions
because they want to learn,
but grown-ups
are often hesitant to ask questions.
Why?
They don’t want to look uninformed.
But acting like we know something
when we don’t is actually dishonest
and probably motivated by pride.
The point is,
Don’t be afraid to reveal
what you don’t know.
Remain humble and teachable like a child.
Now let’s identify
desirable trait number three
by going to Matthew 21:15, 16:
“When the chief priests and the scribes
“saw the marvelous things he did
“and the boys who
were shouting in the temple,
“‘Save, we pray, the Son of David!’
“they became indignant and said to him:
“‘Do you hear what these are saying?’
“Jesus said to them
“‘Yes. Did you never read this,
“‘“Out of the mouth of children and infants
you have brought forth praise”?’”
So, what desirable characteristic
can we identify?
Young children
are exuberant and enthusiastic.
Well, in like manner,
we want to remain exuberant and expressive
about Jehovah, Jesus,
the Kingdom, and other spiritual things.
Psalm 145:7 encourages us to “bubble over”
and “shout joyfully”
because of these wonderful things.
And we never want to lose
that childlike enthusiasm.
Well, there we have
three desirable traits of a young child
that we want to do our utmost to imitate.
If we had time, we could discuss
several other positive characteristics,
such as how children tend to be trusting,
not prejudiced, and not hypocritical.
But now in review, may each of us
prayerfully strive not to be childish
when it comes to (1) immature feeding habits,
(2) being easily tricked, or fooled,
and (3) preferring play over responsibility.
On the other hand,
may each of us
prayerfully strive to be childlike
when it comes to being
(1) innocent and inexperienced
concerning badness,
(2) humble and teachable,
and (3) exuberant and enthusiastic
about spiritual things!